skill/SKILL.md, before:

---
name: crabpath
description: "Memory graph for AI agents — learned document routing with semantic embeddings. Use when: agent needs better context retrieval, memory recall is missing relevant docs, or you want to reduce context bloat. Replaces static file loading with a learned graph that knows what to retrieve (and what NOT to)."
homepage: https://github.com/jonathangu/crabpath
metadata:
  openclaw:
    emoji: "🦀"
    requires:
      bins:
        - crabpath
    install:
      - id: uv
        kind: uv
        package: crabpath
        bins:
          - crabpath
        label: "Install CrabPath (uv)"
---

# CrabPath 🦀

Memory graph for AI agents. Learns which documents help and which to suppress.

## Setup (one time)

### 1. Install

```bash
python3 -m venv ~/.crabpath-env && source ~/.crabpath-env/bin/activate
pip install crabpath
```

macOS Homebrew Python requires a virtual environment (PEP 668).

```bash
# For embeddings (strongly recommended):
pip install crabpath[openai]     # or: pip install crabpath[google]
```

### Custom LLM Access (optional)

If your agent host provides an OpenAI-compatible endpoint, point CrabPath at it:

```bash
export CRABPATH_LLM_URL=http://localhost:18789/v1/chat/completions
export CRABPATH_LLM_TOKEN=$OPENCLAW_GATEWAY_TOKEN
```

### 2. Initialize graph + embeddings

Requires one of: `OPENAI_API_KEY`, `GEMINI_API_KEY`, or local Ollama.

```bash
crabpath init \
  --workspace ~/.openclaw/workspace \
  --sessions ~/.openclaw/agents/main/sessions/
```

Without an embedding provider: `crabpath init --workspace ~/.openclaw/workspace --no-embeddings`

### 3. Wire into agent

```bash
crabpath install-hook --agent-workspace ~/.openclaw/workspace
```

This writes an integration block to AGENTS.md. Idempotent — safe to run twice.

## Usage

### Query the memory graph

Before answering questions about prior work, context, or decisions:

```bash
crabpath query '<summary of user message>' \
  --graph ~/.crabpath/graph.json \
  --index ~/.crabpath/embed.json \
  --top 8 --json
```

Returns JSON with `fired` nodes (relevant context) and `inhibited` nodes (suppressed).

Use the returned context to supplement memory files. CrabPath suggests context — it never modifies responses directly.

### Learn from outcomes

After each response, tell CrabPath whether the retrieval helped:

**When the user accepts your answer** (no correction, conversation moves on):
```bash
crabpath learn --graph ~/.crabpath/graph.json --outcome 1.0 --fired-ids node1,node2,node3
```

**When the user corrects you** ('that's wrong', 'no, do X instead', 'you missed Y'):
```bash
crabpath learn --graph ~/.crabpath/graph.json --outcome -1.0 --fired-ids node1,node2,node3
```

The fired-ids come from the previous `crabpath query` JSON output (`fired[].id`).

This is intentionally coarse. +1 strengthens retrieval paths that led to good answers. -1 suppresses paths that led to corrections. Over time, the graph learns which documents actually help for which queries.

### Health check

```bash
crabpath health --graph ~/.crabpath/graph.json --query-stats ~/.crabpath/graph.stats.json
```

Shows 8 metrics with ✅/❌ status. Key targets:
- `avg_nodes_fired_per_query`: 3–10
- `dormant_pct`: 60–97% (the graph learns what NOT to load)
- `reflex_pct`: 0.5–5% (compiled procedures, zero deliberation)

### Track evolution

```bash
crabpath evolve --graph ~/.crabpath/graph.json \
  --snapshots ~/.crabpath/evolution.jsonl --report
```

### Rebuild graph (after workspace changes)

```bash
crabpath init \
  --workspace ~/.openclaw/workspace \
  --sessions ~/.openclaw/agents/main/sessions/
```

Re-running `init` rebuilds from scratch. Your old graph is overwritten.

## When to Use

✅ **USE this skill when:**
- Agent needs better recall of prior work, decisions, or context
- `memory_search` returns low-confidence or irrelevant results
- Context is bloated (loading too many tokens per turn)
- Agent keeps forgetting procedures or repeating mistakes

❌ **DON'T USE when:**
- Simple factual lookups (use web_search)
- Fresh workspace with < 10 files (not enough structure to learn from)
- One-shot questions with no recurring patterns

## Key Concepts

- **Nodes** = document chunks (split from workspace files by heading/paragraph)
- **Edges** = weighted pointers (positive = excitatory, negative = inhibitory)
- **Reflex** (weight > 0.8) = auto-follow, no deliberation
- **Habitual** (0.3–0.8) = router decides
- **Dormant** (< 0.3) = suppressed, the graph learned this isn't useful
- **Edge damping** = synaptic fatigue within an episode (prevents loops)

## Uninstall

```bash
pip uninstall crabpath
rm -rf ~/.crabpath
```

Remove the "CrabPath Memory Graph" section from AGENTS.md.

## Links

- PyPI: https://pypi.org/project/crabpath/
- GitHub: https://github.com/jonathangu/crabpath
- Paper: https://jonathangu.com/crabpath/

Commit message:

Docs: honest about two modes (full vs retrieval-only)
README, SKILL.md, PLAYBOOK all updated:
- Full mode (LLM + embeddings): learned routing, the real product
- Retrieval-only mode (no LLM): basic RAG, works but missing the point
- LLM access section renamed from 'recommended' to 'for full mode'

skill/SKILL.md, after:

---
name: crabpath
description: "Memory graph for AI agents — learned document routing with semantic embeddings. Use when: agent needs better context retrieval, memory recall is missing relevant docs, or you want to reduce context bloat. Replaces static file loading with a learned graph that knows what to retrieve (and what NOT to)."
homepage: https://github.com/jonathangu/crabpath
metadata:
  openclaw:
    emoji: "🦀"
    requires:
      bins:
        - crabpath
    install:
      - id: uv
        kind: uv
        package: crabpath
        bins:
          - crabpath
        label: "Install CrabPath (uv)"
---

# CrabPath 🦀

Memory graph for AI agents. Learns which documents help and which to suppress.

## Setup (one time)

### 1. Install

```bash
python3 -m venv ~/.crabpath-env && source ~/.crabpath-env/bin/activate
pip install crabpath
```

macOS Homebrew Python requires a virtual environment (PEP 668).

```bash
# For embeddings (strongly recommended):
pip install crabpath[openai]     # or: pip install crabpath[google]
```

### Custom LLM Access (optional)

If your agent host provides an OpenAI-compatible endpoint, point CrabPath at it:

```bash
export CRABPATH_LLM_URL=http://localhost:18789/v1/chat/completions
export CRABPATH_LLM_TOKEN=$OPENCLAW_GATEWAY_TOKEN
```

## Modes

CrabPath works in two modes:

**Full mode** (LLM + embeddings): The graph learns from every query. Routing gets smarter. Bad paths get suppressed. This is the real product.
- Requires: any OpenAI-compatible endpoint (set CRABPATH_LLM_URL or OPENAI_API_KEY)

**Retrieval-only mode** (no LLM): Embedding-based search. Works out of the box, but the graph doesn't learn. Basically RAG.
- Requires: nothing (local TF-IDF embeddings included)

For the full CrabPath experience, provide LLM access. See the Install section.

### 2. Initialize graph + embeddings

Requires one of: `OPENAI_API_KEY`, `GEMINI_API_KEY`, or local Ollama.

```bash
crabpath init \
  --workspace ~/.openclaw/workspace \
  --sessions ~/.openclaw/agents/main/sessions/
```

Without an embedding provider: `crabpath init --workspace ~/.openclaw/workspace --no-embeddings`

### 3. Wire into agent

```bash
crabpath install-hook --agent-workspace ~/.openclaw/workspace
```

This writes an integration block to AGENTS.md. Idempotent — safe to run twice.

## Usage

### Query the memory graph

Before answering questions about prior work, context, or decisions:

```bash
crabpath query '<summary of user message>' \
  --graph ~/.crabpath/graph.json \
  --index ~/.crabpath/embed.json \
  --top 8 --json
```

Returns JSON with `fired` nodes (relevant context) and `inhibited` nodes (suppressed).

Use the returned context to supplement memory files. CrabPath suggests context — it never modifies responses directly.

### Learn from outcomes

After each response, tell CrabPath whether the retrieval helped:

**When the user accepts your answer** (no correction, conversation moves on):
```bash
crabpath learn --graph ~/.crabpath/graph.json --outcome 1.0 --fired-ids node1,node2,node3
```

**When the user corrects you** ('that's wrong', 'no, do X instead', 'you missed Y'):
```bash
crabpath learn --graph ~/.crabpath/graph.json --outcome -1.0 --fired-ids node1,node2,node3
```

The fired-ids come from the previous `crabpath query` JSON output (`fired[].id`).

This is intentionally coarse. +1 strengthens retrieval paths that led to good answers. -1 suppresses paths that led to corrections. Over time, the graph learns which documents actually help for which queries.

### Health check

```bash
crabpath health --graph ~/.crabpath/graph.json --query-stats ~/.crabpath/graph.stats.json
```

Shows 8 metrics with ✅/❌ status. Key targets:
- `avg_nodes_fired_per_query`: 3–10
- `dormant_pct`: 60–97% (the graph learns what NOT to load)
- `reflex_pct`: 0.5–5% (compiled procedures, zero deliberation)

### Track evolution

```bash
crabpath evolve --graph ~/.crabpath/graph.json \
  --snapshots ~/.crabpath/evolution.jsonl --report
```

### Rebuild graph (after workspace changes)

```bash
crabpath init \
  --workspace ~/.openclaw/workspace \
  --sessions ~/.openclaw/agents/main/sessions/
```

Re-running `init` rebuilds from scratch. Your old graph is overwritten.

## When to Use

✅ **USE this skill when:**
- Agent needs better recall of prior work, decisions, or context
- `memory_search` returns low-confidence or irrelevant results
- Context is bloated (loading too many tokens per turn)
- Agent keeps forgetting procedures or repeating mistakes

❌ **DON'T USE when:**
- Simple factual lookups (use web_search)
- Fresh workspace with < 10 files (not enough structure to learn from)
- One-shot questions with no recurring patterns

## Key Concepts

- **Nodes** = document chunks (split from workspace files by heading/paragraph)
- **Edges** = weighted pointers (positive = excitatory, negative = inhibitory)
- **Reflex** (weight > 0.8) = auto-follow, no deliberation
- **Habitual** (0.3–0.8) = router decides
- **Dormant** (< 0.3) = suppressed, the graph learned this isn't useful
- **Edge damping** = synaptic fatigue within an episode (prevents loops)

## Uninstall

```bash
pip uninstall crabpath
rm -rf ~/.crabpath
```

Remove the "CrabPath Memory Graph" section from AGENTS.md.

## Links

- PyPI: https://pypi.org/project/crabpath/
- GitHub: https://github.com/jonathangu/crabpath
- Paper: https://jonathangu.com/crabpath/
